Update i18n gettext tutorial to include POT generation, plurals and context support (#3884)
godotengine/godot-docs: tutorials/i18n/localization_using_gettext.rst

  strings, finding strings that haven't been translated etc. 
- gettext supports plurals and context.
- gettext is supported by translation platforms such as
  `Transifex <https://www.transifex.com/>`_ and `Weblate <https://weblate.org/>`_,
  which makes it easier for people to collaborate to localization.
- Compared to CSV, gettext files work better with version control systems like Git,
  as each locale has its own messages file.
- Multiline strings are more convenient to edit in gettext PO files compared
  to CSV files.

Disadvantages
-------------

- gettext PO files have a more complex format than CSV and can be harder to grasp for
  people new to software localization.
- gettext PO files usually use English as the base language. Translators will then use 
  this base language to translate to other languages. You could still user other 
  languages as the base language, but this is not common.

Getting started with translation using PO files
-----------------------------------------------

In this example, we'll create a small example project to show the entire process of translation with PO files.
The whole process could be summarized as: 

> ::
> 
>     Mark strings to translate -> Generate POT -> Translate PO -> Import PO

Reviewer: It might be better to format this as a list:

```suggestion
- Mark strings to translate.
- Generate a PO template (POT).
- Copy the template into a PO file and translate it.
- Import the PO file into the project.
```

> Below shows the detailed steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each step is detailed below.
```

1) Mark strings to be translated
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The first step is to mark all the strings that we want to translate. Use the translation 
API :ref:`tr() <class_Object_method_tr>` or :ref:`tr_n() <class_Object_method_tr_n>` 
to mark any text that you want to translate in GDScript. ``tr()`` is used to translate 
singular word or sentence, while ``tr_n()`` is used to translate plural word or sentence.

.. note:: Scene nodes' properties containing user-facing texts, such as ``Text`` property, ``Tooltip`` property, 
          will be automatically translated. The strings contained in these properties will be passed into 
          the ``tr()`` function by the game engine when the game is run.
          
The ``translation_example.gd`` should look like this after we use ``tr()`` and ``tr_n()`` functions to mark the strings.

::

    # translation_example.gd
    
    extends Node2D

    var abilities = [tr("dodge"), tr("strike"), tr("shoot")]

    func _ready():
        print(tr("Hello Sir Godot"))
        
        for ability in abilities:
            print(ability)
        
        print(tr_n("Found %d diamond", "Found %d diamonds", 10) % 10)
        pass 

> 2) Extract marked strings (Generate POT)
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2) Extract marked strings (Generate a PO template)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

After we have marked the texts to be translated in ``GDScript`` and created some nodes containing texts, 
we can now extract these strings. In the Editor, go to **Project**, **Project Settings...**, **Localization**, 
**POT generation**, include the files containing the texts that need to be translated.

.. image:: img/pot_gen.png

After you have included the files, click **Generate POT** and select a location. This will generate a translation 
template (POT) file in the location you have selected. POT file contains all the source strings that 
need to be translated. You can open it with a text editor or a gettext editor, such as `Poedit <https://poedit.net/>`_.

If you open it with a text editor, you'll see that the ``msgid`` field contains the strings that we want to translate. In the 

> next line after ``msgid``, we have ``msgstr`` field. ``msgstr`` will later contain the translated strings. Right now they are 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
next line after ``msgid``, we have ``msgstr`` field. ``msgstr`` will later contain the translated strings. Right now, they are 
```

empty because we haven't provided any translation yet.

3) Translate the strings (Translate PO)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

POT file is just a translation template. Before we can begin translating, we need to convert the POT file into a ``.po`` file, 
which contains the translation for a specific language. For example, we can have ``fr.po`` (French), ``ar.po`` (Arabic), 

> ``ru.po`` (Russian) etc. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``ru.po`` (Russian), etc. 
```

To convert a POT file to a PO file, we have two options:

> - Open the POT file with a gettext editor, and the editor will ask us to create a new PO file with the language that we want.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Open the POT file with a gettext editor. The editor will ask you to create a new PO file with the desired language.
```

> - Download gettext tools (the end of this page contains guide on installing gettext tools), and execute the command below in the 

Reviewer: We can use a linked reference to make this easier to follow:

```suggestion
- :ref:`Download gettext tools <doc_localization_using_gettext_installing_tools>`, and execute the command below in the 
```

Make sure to apply the suggestion that adds the reference as well (it's below).

This custom plugin will extract the strings and write into the POT file when you hit **Generate POT**. To learn more about how to
create the translation parser plugin, see :ref:`EditorTranslationParserPlugin <class_EditorTranslationParserPlugin>`.

More on PO format and gettext
-----------------------------

If you would like to find out more about how gettext works, here's a 
`A Quick Gettext Tutorial <https://www.labri.fr/perso/fleury/posts/programming/a-quick-gettext-tutorial.html>`_.
It's written with C projects in mind, but much of the advice also applies to Godot.

For the complete documentation, see `GNU Gettext <https://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/manual/gettext.html>`_.

Checking the validity of a PO file or template
----------------------------------------------

It is possible to check whether a gettext file's syntax is valid.

If you open with Poeditor, it will display the appropriate warnings if there's some syntax errors. 
You could also verify by running the gettext command below:

.. code-block:: shell

    msgfmt fr.po --check

If there are syntax errors or warnings, they will be displayed in the console.
Otherwise, ``msgfmt`` won't output anything.

> 

Reviewer: Add a reference so we can point to it (see above):

```suggestion

.. _doc_localization_using_gettext_installing_tools:
```

> Installing gettext tools
> ------------------------

Reviewer: Add a blank line after so it's recognized as a valid heading:

```suggestion
Installing gettext tools
------------------------

```

  languages as the base language, but this is not common.

Getting started with translation using PO files
-----------------------------------------------

In this example, we'll create a small example project to show the entire process of translation with PO files.
The whole process could be summarized as: 

1) Mark strings to translate.
2) Generate a PO template (POT).
3) Copy the template into a PO file and translate it.
4) Import the PO file into the project.

Each step is detailed below.

Setup
~~~~~

Start with an empty project. Create a ``Node2D`` and attach a ``GDScript`` on it. Add some strings in the 
``GDScript`` by creating variables or using ``print()`` statements etc. You could follow the example provided below.
After that, add some ``Label`` nodes in your 2D scene, and type in some texts in the ``Text`` property. 

::

    # translation_example.gd
    
    extends Node2D

    var abilities = ["dodge", "strike", "shoot"]

    func _ready():
        print("Hello Sir Godot")
        
        for ability in abilities:
            print(ability)
        
        print("Found %d diamond(s)" % 10)

>         pass 

Reviewer 2: There's no need for this `pass`.

1) Mark strings to be translated
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The first step is to mark all the strings that need to be translated. Use the translation 
API :ref:`tr() <class_Object_method_tr>` or :ref:`tr_n() <class_Object_method_tr_n>` 
to mark any text that you want to translate in GDScript. ``tr()`` is used to translate 
singular word or sentence, while ``tr_n()`` is used to translate plural word or sentence.

.. note:: Scene nodes' properties containing user-facing texts, such as ``Text`` property, ``Tooltip`` property, 
          will be automatically translated. The strings contained in these properties will be passed into 
          the ``tr()`` function by the game engine when the game is run.
          
The ``translation_example.gd`` should look like this after ``tr()`` and ``tr_n()`` functions are used to mark the strings.

::

    # translation_example.gd
    
    extends Node2D

    var abilities = [tr("dodge"), tr("strike"), tr("shoot")]

    func _ready():
        print(tr("Hello Sir Godot"))
        
        for ability in abilities:
            print(ability)
        
        print(tr_n("Found %d diamond", "Found %d diamonds", 10) % 10)

>         pass 

Reviewer 2: Neither here.

**Project**, **Project Settings...**, **Localization**, **Translations**, click **Add…** 
and choose the PO file in the file dialog. The locale will be inferred from the
``"Language: <code>\n"`` property in the PO file.

.. image:: img/import_po.png

Using the translations in game
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Alright! Now you have everything you need. 

Before running the game, you have to tell the ``TranslationServer`` to use the desired language. 
To do this, you'll need to call the function :ref:`TranslationServer.set_locale() <class_TranslationServer_method_set_locale>`.

Here's the final code of ``translation_example.gd``. In the code below, the locale used is ``fr``. You should
use the locale of the PO file you imported.

::

    # translation_example.gd
    
    extends Node2D

    var abilities = [tr("dodge"), tr("strike"), tr("shoot")]

    func _ready():
        TranslationServer.set_locale("fr")      
    
        print(tr("Hello Sir Godot"))
        
        for ability in abilities:
            print(ability)
        
        print(tr_n("Found %d diamond", "Found %d diamonds", 10) % 10)

>         pass 

Reviewer 2: Nor here.
